 
I. Introductio n 
 
In 1980, Boston was a declining city in a m iddle- incom e metropolitan area  in a cold state. 
Over the 60 year period be tween 1920 and 1980, Boston’s population had fallen from  
758,000 to 563,000, and Boston’s real estate values in 1980 were so low that three 
quarters of its hom es wer e worth less than the bricks and m ortar cost of construction 
(Glaeser and Gyourko, 2001).  There was little re ason at that date to  suspect that Boston 
would be any m ore succ essful than Rochester or Pittsbu rgh o r St. Louis o ver the n ext few 
decades.   
 
Twenty years later, Boston looks like the future not the past.  The city and the 
metropolitan  area hav e grown.  More stri kingly, the Boston prim ary m etropolitan 
statistical area (the core city  and its close suburbs) is the eighth richest metropolitan area 
in the coun try ranked by per cap ita in come; it is the rich est m etropo litan a rea th at is 
neither a suburb of New York nor in the Ba y Area.  Housing prices—alw ays the surest 
sign that people want to li ve in a city—have soared.  According to the 2000 census, 
Boston’s m edian housing value of $233,000 m akes it the fourth m ost expensive 
metropolitan  area (after Boulder,  Honolulu and Orange County) that is n either in the New 
York nor San Francisco m etropolitan  statistica l areas.  In one sam ple of 541 cities, f our 
of the five cities with the fastest hous ing price growth between 1980 and 2000 were 
Somerville, Newton, Bost on and Cambridge.   
 
The source of Boston’s recen t success is not  unknown.  Most skilled cities have done 
well over th e past two decades, and Boston in 1980 had a strong skill bas e relativ e to its 
rustbe lt peers like Syr acuse and Detr oit.  Today, Boston is one of the m ost educated 
metropolitan  areas of the country.  Th is skill base,  which is most st rongly related to th e 
educational history of th e region, en abled Bo ston to becom e a successful city in the 
inform ation age.  The Boston region’s dom inant industries are now high technology, 
higher education and financial services.  Th ese industries have done extrem ely well over 
 2
the past 20 years and have strengthened Bo ston’s econom y, but Boston’s ability to be a 
cente r for these sec tors was itse lf a result of  its h istoric com mitment to skills.     
 
But Boston’s transform ation from  a dying factor y town to a thriving inform ation city is 
only the latest of the region’s rem arkable re births.  Boston’s hist ory is not a seam less 
story of steady success, but rath er a series of crises and restructuring.  For the first 
century of colonial Am erica, Boston had been  the larges t city in the co lonies and had 
thrived as a conduit of goods between the ol d world and the new.  But during the second 
half of the 18th centu ry, the city stagn ated.  New Yo rk and Philadelphia w ere superior 
ports because of better river access to  the rich hin terland and because they were m ore 
southern and less isolated in New England.   Boston looked as if it was likely to becom e a 
nostalg ic ba ckwater just as the Un ited States were being formed.  
 
However, during the first fifty years of the 19th century, Boston was able to capitalize on 
its rem arkable base of seafaring human capital  to becom e a center for g lobal shipp ing and 
sailing.  Boston’s com parative advantage was not in its port, but in its people who 
crewed, cap tained and o wned ships that saile d in and out of ports from  New York to 
China.  One way to understand this change is that peace and technological im prove ments 
created an in creas ingly g lobal m aritime economy during the early 19th century.  Boston’s 
comparative advantage in seafaring becam e incr easing ly valuable during  this e ra, and  the 
city changed from  being an im portant port for goods com ing and going to Am erica, into 
the cap ital o f a vast seaf aring em pire. 
 
The source of Boston’s early 19th century succ ess—sailing s kills— ensu red tha t Boston’s 
maritim e empire would n ot surviv e the switch f rom clipper sh ips to s team.  Steam ships 
required far less hum an capital than sailing ships, and all of a sudden Boston seem ed like 
it was in d anger of beco ming obsolete.  Inde ed, its New England com petitors such as 
Salem  and New Bedfor d never really recovered from the switch f rom sail to ste am.  But 
unlike those cities, Boston had acquired, as a last product of its sailing suprem acy, a vast 
population o f Irish imm igrants.  Boston becam e Irish because the potato fam ine happened 
to have coincided with the last decade wh en it was cheaper to get from  Liverpool to 
 3
Boston than from  Liverpool to New York.  If the fa mine had occurred ten years later, it 
seem s likely that there w ould have been no s ubstantial Irish populat ion in Boston because 
steerage fares on steam ships to New York had becom e sufficiently ch eap.    
 
The initial Irish population which served as th e nucleus for a growing city of i mmigrants 
during the nineteenth century he lped to turn Boston from  a maritim e city in 1840 to an 
industrial city in 1890.  Other factors also m attered.  Fortunes, m ade off t he China trade, 
were reinvested in Boston area m anufacturing plants.  Railroa ds, som etimes also bu ilt 
from  trading wealth, turned Boston into th e railroad hub of Ne w England.  Finally, the 
switch from  water power to steam  enabled factories to m ove from  rivers like the 
Merr imack to a m ore centra l loca tion to save  on labor and transpor tation costs.  Like 
most large Am erican cities du ring the late 19th century, Boston did well as a center f or the 
industrializing country. 
 
But Boston’s heady period of growth was over by 1920.  Between 1920 and 1950, the 
city population stayed flat, while the country ’s population grew by 50 percent.  Between 
1950 and 1980, the city lost population.  In 1910, Boston was the fifth largest city in the 
country.  By 1980, 19 cities were bigger than Boston.  Boston declined for at least four 
separate reasons.  First, Boston was a cold city and over the 20th centu ry, warm  cities  
grew m uch more quickly than cold cities .  Air condition ing and im provem ents in public 
health greatly increased the quality of public life in the sunbelt.  D eclining transport costs 
freed workers from  havi ng to live close to ri vers or natural resour ces.  Instead, people 
could m ove to warm  places that were pleas ant to  live in.  Second, Boston had been a 
manufacturing town and all m anufacturing town s were declining.  Third, the autom obile 
was supplanting older form s of personal tr ansportation and central city Boston was 
particula rly tied to thes e olde r form s of transportation and pa rticularly bad as a driving 
city.  Finally, Boston was a city with high taxes and heavy regulat ion.  All of these 
factors suggest that Boston’s mid-twentieth cen tury decline was pretty inevitab le.   
 
Yet, again B oston has reinvented itself and th e past twenty years have been a period of 
enorm ous success for the region both in te rms of i ncomes and in term s of property 
 4
values.  In the labor m arket, education is the dom inant factor in today’s econom y, and 
Boston has been specializing in skills fo r alm ost 400 years.  Am ong the 200 or so 
metropolitan  areas with more than 1 60,000 re sidents, th e Boston prim ary metropolitan 
statistical area ranks fifth in share of  the population over the age of 25 with college 
degrees (after Boulder, Stam ford, Madison, and San Jose) an d third in the share of the 
population between 25 and 34 with college degr ees (after Boulder and S tamford).  It 
ranks seven th am ong all m etropolitan  areas in its share of employees in managerial, 
professional or related professions af ter Boul der, Corvallis, S an Francisco, San Jose, 
Stamford and W ashington.  The region’s success has m eant that the m ost pressing 
problem  for the area is that its regulation of  new construction has m eant that not enough 
people have been able to take  advantage of the area’s hi gh levels of productivity.   
 
The story of Boston’s history yields the fo llowing im plications about urban dynam ics.  
First, long run urban success does not m ean perpetual growth.  Long run urban success 
means successfully responding to challenges.  The basic pattern of Boston’s history is 
that the city specializes in one area and inevitably either th is area declin es or their 
dominance in the area is challenged.  The surv ival of the city hinges on re-orientation.  
Boston is a large city wh ile Salem  is not, b ecause Boston resp onded to the declin e of sail 
by becom ing a m anufacturing city w hile Sale m did not.  Boston is a thriving city while 
Detroit is no t becaus e when m anufacturing dec lined, Boston was able to redefine itself as 
a high technology city, while Detroit was not. 
 
Second, Boston’s ability to re -orient itself hinged on indus trial diversity.  Boston had 
never been just a port and from  the beginni ng, artisans in the town had m anufactured 
goods which were then taken on Bostonian sh ips abroad.  As such, the sw itch from  
seaport to factory town required a large re-e mphasis, but not inventing industry from  
scratch.  Likewise, Boston’s seafaring comme rce had always needed financial services, 
and as a result, the city had always had banks, brokers and insurers.  As Boston’s 
manufacturing declined, finance wa s able to take up its slack.   
 
 5
