by 1.5 percent.  Urban success in Massachusetts  means high er housing p rices.  In Texas, 
success m eans m ore bodies. 
 
Together these set of graphs suggest that the regulatory e nvironm ent strongly influences 
the path of urban growth.  In Texas, which is one extrem e, successful cities grow in 
population.  In Boston, which has a much m ore restrictive regulatory environm ent, urban 
success has led to higher prices, but not m ore people.  
 
At this po int, it is h ard to say how co stly the regulation of new construction in 
Massachusetts m ay be.  Indeed, it m ay be th at the benefits of preserving low density 
living outweigh the costs of artificially forci ng people to stay away from  Boston, and the 
costs of forcing em ployers to pay m ore for workers.  Further work m ust address this 
issue.  In 19 80, dealing with urban success di d not seem  to be Boston’s most pressin g 
problem , but in 2000, we are lucky enough to be  challenged with figuring out the right 
way to grow. 
 
VI. Conclusion 
 
Boston has had an extraordinary history and it has had four different eras of success, each 
driven by a slightly different force.  For the first 100 years of its existence, it was 
America’s p remier city.  Boston was the cap ital of America’s most commercially d iverse 
region and it served as the central port for that region.  In the 1750-1800 period, Boston 
had its first era of declin e as its port was eclipsed by New Yo rk and Philadelphia.  Those 
cities’ m ore southern locations and s uperior rivers made them vastly sup erior places fo r 
shipping goods into and out of Am erica. 
 
But in the first 40 years of the 19th century, Boston had its first recovery.  Peace and the 
increasing globalization of the 19th century m aritim e economy enabled B oston seafarers 
to explo it their exp ertise.  New York and Philade lphia wer e still the dom inant poin ts of 
entry in the U.S., but Boston based seafar ers m anned ships owned by Boston m erchants, 
 39
which traveled into and out of  those ports.  Boston m ariners  also thrived f rom the China 
trade and the whaling industry.   
 
Just as the steam ship elim inated Boston’s su prem acy in sailing ships, Boston reinvented 
itself once again as a m anufacturing city.  B ecause of the unusual tem poral co incid ence 
of the Irish potato fam ine and the last peri od of Bostonian m aritim e dom inance, a vast 
number of Irish imm igrants cam e to Massac husetts becaus e Boston was th e cheapes t and 
closest port of entry.  These im migrants would provide the m uscle for industrial growth 
of what had been a m aritim e time.  Boston’ s nineteenth century industrial growth was 
abetted by railroads and by the fact that f actories used steam , not water, f or power.  
Indeed, almost every large northern city in  the U .S. as of 1860 becam e an industrial 
powerhouse over the next 60 years as factories started in cen tral locations where they 
could save transport costs and m ake use of large urban labor forces. 
 
But this period of growth cam e to an end in 1920.  During the m iddle years of the 20th 
century, urban growth was driven by the m ove to sun and sprawl.  As Boston was a high 
density city in a cold sta te, it was bou nd to decline.  Bostonian streets were built around 
the pedestrian and the streetcar and, unsurp risingly, people left for the edges of the 
metropolitan  area.  Mo reover, te chno logica l improvem ents meant th at wa rmer clim es 
becam e increasing ly attractiv e and p eople m oved south and west.  As of 1980, Boston 
resem bled m any of the industrial hulks dotting the northeast and Midwest.  A reasonable 
guess was that Boston’s path between 1980 a nd 2000 would resem ble the path that was 
actually taken by Detroit. 
 
In the 1980-2000 period, Boston turned out to look  more like San Jose than like Detroit.  
The boom ing inform ation econom y relied on sk illed workers and Boston’s long history 
had lef t the city with a s urfeit of universities.  As a result,  Boston was id eally po ised to 
take advan tage of the ris e in re turns to skill tha t so marked th e last quar ter of the 
twentieth century.  Boston left m anufacturi ng and specialized in high technology, finance 
and education—industries that required skilled w orkers and that did extrem ely well over 
 40
the 1980-2000 period.  Indeed, as long as the sk ills boom  continues, it seem s likely that 
Boston will continue to thrive. 
 
Still, Boston ’s succe ss leaves us with  a major policy quandary.  In the less regulated areas 
of the sunbelt, local econom ic success lead s to m assive new construction, accom panying 
large increases in population and sm all changes in housing prices.  In the regulated 
Massachusetts econom y, new construction is  extrem ely diffic ult and as a result, 
econom ic success leads to higher prices, not la rge num bers of new hom es.  As a result, 
Boston faces extrao rdinarily high ho using prices.   Boston’s lim its on new constructio n 
were relatively costless in an era of urban dec line, but as th e area th rives, these barriers to 
construction pose the largest barrier to new gr owth and m ay well create large soc ial costs 
for Bostonians and would-be Bostonians.  Th e regulation on new cons truction is sur ely 
the m ost important policy area facing Boston today.    
 
 41
